So we're on with Mr. Carter Burden in New York, and I'm going to just put this close to you.
I guess I have read a lot of the background.
Those pieces that I mentioned, are the facts in there essentially correct?
I think essentially correct, yeah, as I recall.
I mean, Harvard is correct.
Yes, yes, yes.
I mean, the basic biographical things.
I really don't want to ask you biographical questions.
Yeah, no, the biographical stuff I think is absolutely correct.
Let's start.
Has the passion diminished in any way?
No, I've been on a bit of a hiatus because we sold our apartment.
You don't mind if I do this?
No, please, I just did it myself.
For 23 years, I'd been in this large apartment on the East River that was great for quantity of books.
I mean, they had a lot of room.
And for various reasons, my kids had both grown up.
My wife...
have been eager to move for quite some time, and I was afraid the floor was probably going to collapse into the next apartment.
We sold that a year ago, and everything has been, all my books have been in storage for the last year.
As we speak?
As we speak, really.
We have bought a new apartment, which is much smaller, and I will be able to have fewer books, but it's going to be basically
The best feature is a double-height living room, but it's going to be all bookcases, which I think will ultimately be a fabulous room.
But I will have one less room, which is a problem, so I think I have to be more selective.
And two, not having the books around is distressing.
Really?
Yeah, it's really true.
It becomes more abstract to collect.
What in particular do you miss?
Well, I like books as objects, too.
I mean, I think they're, I like living with them, I like looking at them, I like holding them, and so forth.
And if you are just collecting from a list, it's just, it's not the same thing.
I love, I make all my own, you know, glassine covers and so forth.
Yeah.
And, which I, was manual therapy for me, and I loved then putting a book in the right place, you know, with the author collection and so forth.
So you'll be cutting the collection down now.
At last count, it was around 70,000 volumes.
Yeah, that number, I'm not sure how accurate that is.
That was just a very rough calculation.
This is... It's impossible.
It's impossible.
I mean, I say I've got anywhere between 5,000 and 7,000 volumes.
It's a lot of books.
But whether it's 5,000 or 7,000, I couldn't tell you.
Yeah, exactly.
I...
I'm on the board of the New York Public Library.
I just went on the Morgan Library Board, and I'm on the Library Visiting Committee at Harvard.
And I think all three of those places are places I'd like to give, you know, completed collections to.
I did give my science fiction collection to the New York Public Library.
Somebody mentioned that to me as a really excellent collection.
It's a wonderful collection, yeah.
You know, it's a fairly esoteric field.
Somebody in California mentioned that.
Yeah.
It might have been Ralph Sipper.
Yeah, yeah.
Because I saw Ralph up in Santa Fe.
And he said your science fiction collection was a major collection.
In fact, I think you were one of the very first people to maybe take it very seriously.
Well, I don't know.
I don't think I can take back credit.
I mean, I think... But I guess when you think about the... It's always been very actively collected.
I mean, you know, the prices were very high for some of those people.
But...
I think maybe the context was this is something the New York public really didn't have.
The New York didn't have at all.
Which I guess you have to take into account, collecting modern firsts.
I have realized that I can't do all, I mean, I can't keep up with
you know, with everything.
I mean, it's absurd.
But you tried, though.
I tried.
I made a manful effort at it.
Were you defeated, do you think?
I think I was defeated.
Yeah, I think I was defeated.
Because another question is, is the collection ever complete?
No, it never is complete.
No book collector ever closes a collection, I think.
Yeah, I don't think so.
And your house and garden piece, you say, you give the uptick case, you know, he was for, he's a possible, I start collecting.
You have to, I mean, exactly.
I'm still trying with him.
I know, exactly.
And if he tried to do every issue, one of 26 and one of 200.
He does this very mindfully.
He has a sense of the market.
He really does.
Do you think he makes much money from it?
I think he makes enough money from it.
I think he's a good young man from Pennsylvania.
This is just my own sense, because I know one guy that prints things in Worcester, Bill Ferguson does medical books.
I mean, they sit down and they talk.
They really do, yeah.
They talk about what the breakdown is going to be.
He's never divulged any of these figures.
I've always been curious what the author actually made out of some of these things.
I don't know.
But he drives a bargain.
Yeah, he does.
It's not for love at all.
You have, I guess...
6,000 authors.
Yeah.
Is it possible when you have 6,000 authors, my God, to know your authors, to know your collection?
No, it became impossible.
I mean, it became... We are.
I think it's, as you well know, I think, I mean, it's a something, I mean, it's a feel that you live and learn.
I mean, experience is very important, and I know a hell of a lot more than I did
ten years ago, and I never would, if I were starting today, I certainly would never attempt to be as broad as I started out to be.
And now it really is a process of winnowing it down, reducing the number of authors considerably, probably trying to be less complete
in terms of having every issue of a book and all that kind of stuff, and proofs and all the rest of it.
Well, when you winnow down, do you discard the lesser authors, the ones with the lesser reputation, or the ones you don't like?
I've been debating this in my own mind the last year.
I thought one approach was to take a whole category and like the science fiction and give it to the New York Public Library.
But that was something they didn't have at all.
They were interested in, and I wanted to do something for them.
I could do that, say, with all detective fiction or all poetry or whatever like that, but that I just don't want to do, I don't think.
So what I'm trying to do is keep the people I consider more important.
I guess the collection is about, what, 10 years?
Can you give me a year about when it started?
I can't remember the exact year.
I think it was probably 79, 80, something like that.
And you collect everything, by the way, apparently.
I mean, you collect toy soldiers and baseball.
Oh, yeah, but not at the same time.
That's what you started with.
Yeah.
But, I mean, you're a respected collector of art and sculpture and everything.
Right, right.
But from what I can gather, the passion is really now for the books.
Very much so.
Yeah, very much.
And why would you say you came to this last?
I don't know.
Where were you all these years?
It's interesting.
I really don't know.
I think that, well, in one sense, I mean, art became just too expensive to collect.
I mean, I started collecting American contemporary art in the 60s.
when you could buy a Frank Stella for $2,000 and a Jasper Johns for $10,000.
That, fairly quickly, got out of my league entirely.
Did you buy some of these things for directing?
Oh, yes, absolutely.
I bought a Jasper Johns for $10,000.
I had, at one point, 15 Stellas, Rothko, de Kooning,
Barnett Newman.
Well, with the market being what it has been, not necessarily what it is at this moment, has the temptation been to sell?
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
I mean, you had a couple of zeros.
I paid for my book collecting, basically, with the profits I made on the thing.
Really?
Yeah, yeah.
Did you ever consider these investments?
Never, never.
Sometimes you have to tell your family you missed them.
You did, exactly.
Exactly.
Well, now they think, of course, they thought I was nuts at the time, and now they think I'm a genius for having done it.
And the whole point is I wasn't nuts and I wasn't a genius.
Roger started at Harvard, you must know Roger.
A wonderful man, I think.
We've been together a number of times.
He said, well, one thing that puzzles me as much as anything, without naming anyone, because he's a very discreet man,
why some people, not why they start collecting, but why they stop.
And I'm sure he had in mind Arthur Houghton.
Right, except he had the perfect example.
He had the perfect example.
And I've asked a number of people, and nobody really has.
In fact, he died, and I never had a chance to think of him.
And some people say, well, maybe people thought he was crazy.
and he wanted to prove that he wasn't.
But I think that's too simple.
Have you run into a fellow called Michael Thomas, who's a writer who's written several novels, and was a good collector.
I mean, you know, fairly small scale, but had a fabulous Wah collection and a great Eliot collection and other things like that.
And he just, in the last couple years, just decided to sell everything.
Sold the whole collection through
Glenn Horowitz, and he would be interesting to talk to in terms of why he's done.
Is he in New York?
He lives out on Long Island.
He's from New York.
What does he do?
He's a columnist for the paper called The New York Observer.
I think I have heard of him.
And he's written about four or five novels.
So I have heard of him.
Yeah.
And I can either get you his number or... But he's very articulate.
I mean, he's a writer.
He's very articulate and a collector.
And he would be interesting to talk to on that point.
That would be very interesting.
I'm doing a lot of these little things, not just collectors.
For instance, Yale primarily, for instance, has an undergraduate award for book collectors.
Why do they do that?
Just to interest people in books.
I was at J.C.
Dallin.
That was Harvard, by the way.
Does Harvard give an award?
I asked Tom Adams about this last week.
He said, well, Harvard, you can get it better.
They used to give a seminar.
Well, there was that famous guy who, yeah.
Famous guy, Winship.
Yeah, I guess so.
And, you know, Arthur Houghton was one of his students.
Right.
Oh, a lot of it could be exciting.
And he said, you know, they infected him with this enthusiasm for books.
And, you know, he said, be a little cynical.
He said, look ahead.
And Harvard does give an award, huh?
To the undergraduate collection, the most interesting undergraduate collection.
It would be interesting to find out, because I have been talking to the accomplished collectors, or the interesting collectors, but not the beginning, which might make a very interesting study.
I think it would be very interesting.
I do think the instinct is innate to some extent, but I think it could clearly be nurtured.
And I mean, what a better thing to do than to encourage people to something that's going to enrich their lives and their minds for, you know, the next 40 years.
I think it's a great idea.
Innate on the one hand, but not inherited on the other.
No, definitely not inherited.
Definitely not inherited.
Because the first thing so many people do, I mean, look at Bradley Martin's collection, you know, Scattered to the Fort Wayne.
Right, right.
And this is something I want to talk about at some point, but...
On the one hand, so much of his stuff really should have gone out into the market, because you have to think of the next generation of collectors.
I mean, there are first folios in institutions.
Why should you have given that to an institution?
But the ornithological collection was pretty extraordinary, better than any institutional collection.
And there was an argument that maybe that should have been kept together.
Do you have any philosophical thoughts on this?
Well, I think it becomes a very practical question.
I mean, what was the total for those sales?
Twenty-something million dollars?
Big money.
Twenty-nine.
Twenty-nine million dollars.
Well, in order for his heirs to have kept the collection, for example, they would have had to come up with seventeen million dollars in cash just to keep the books, which becomes prohibitive.
Why would they have to?
Because of inheritance taxes.
I mean, but couldn't he have taken care of this beforehand?
No, he would have, one way or the other, he would have had to pay that much, either gift tax or inheritance tax.
It's like, that's why nobody inherits these hugely valuable paintings anymore, unless you've got billions of dollars and lots of cash.
It becomes a very expensive thing to pass on.
It also becomes an enormous asset.
I don't know how, and Bradley Martin was rich, but I mean, $30 million is $30 million.
There is irony, though, isn't there?
$30 million if this Japanese guy who spent $150 million for two paintings had, if his artistic taste were inclined to books, what he could have done, I mean, with the Doheny sale, $30 million, Martin, $29 million, Garden, $16 million,
He could have built one of the finest libraries in the world.
He had 20 or 30 million left over to build a shrine, you know, to house it all.
And all he would have had to have done was hold his hand out.
So we have to keep this thing in context.
The night before the garden sale, the night before, De Kooning, who was a living artist, 21 million to a Japanese, 16 million for 314 lots of the garden.
So we do have to...
We do have to kind of keep... Look, a Ferrari went for $10 million.
I mean, it's really... It's all... There's no such thing as absolute value, anyway.
But books remain an excellent thing to collect.
And you can collect at any level.
Right.
Exactly.
You can go out and do lovely things for dollars.
Right.
Exactly.
I agree with you.
If you're inclined to go to the Brimfield Fair, which is running now in Massachusetts, you know, you don't mind getting dirty.
I vote.
I love getting... Yeah, I like that, too.
I'm sorry, how do I get off on this?
But I guess we're talking about your own thoughts about... Why people stop, or the Bradley Martin, whether he should have given at the institution.
I think it becomes financially prohibitive to do that, basically.
It's certainly financially prohibitive to be able to inherit something of that value, although he could have kept some books and so forth.
But I think it's great to help institutions, and I think it's great to put them up for other collectors to buy.
I don't think there's an absolute rule that should apply.
Were you naive early?
Would you say you were kind of a naive collector?
Oh, yeah.
Absolutely.
I mean, just the thought that you could collect the entire scope of a... Right, right.
Well, I had no idea what I was getting into.
I mean, I spent thousands of times more dollars than I ever, you know,
planned to spend.
Really?
Yeah.
So you made, do you think you made mistakes, or...?
Well, I mean, you always make, everybody makes mistakes.
Probably a lot of my mistakes I'm not even aware of.
It is said that you influenced the price of books.
Do you think that that's...?
Probably.
It's such a narrow field, I think it's possible.
I mean, everybody knew that Carter Burden was buying books.
Modern First, right, yeah.
And
I imagine that you must have heard from a lot of dealers urgently telling you about things that they have.
Right, right.
But I also understand that you negotiate.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
I mean, you're not a pushover.
No, no.
No, hopefully not.
But what I mean is something might be irresistible.
I have to have it.
Yeah.
Well, that's part of the sickness, right?
But I don't have to have it at your price.
Right, exactly, exactly.
Well, one thing that works in my favor is that if it's that expensive, there's not a lot of competition for it.
I mean, there's really not... There aren't people who are spending huge amounts of money for modern... Well, it's not... Certain authors, it's not true.
I mean, I've lost... I mean, I've been outbid many times at auctioning things on James material and Pound material and so forth.
Did you ever go to the auctions yourself?
Yeah, but as a rule, I learned a long time ago that that's a mistake.
That's what the chef told me last week.
He said, never again.
He gave me a very cute story, which I don't bore you with, but that was the last time.
They saw me there, and things happened.
Or if Carter Burden wants this so badly, maybe he'll buy it.
Later, down the road.
You have to get agents at some point.
I think it's the only way to do it.
It's really the only way to do it.
And you buy from a whole network of dealers, I guess.
Yeah, and I think you also, when you're there, you can get carried away and go way beyond what you should pay for something.
Dick Manning, you know Dick, is a recent collector.
He collects a lot of different things.
I think he's still trying to find his focus.
It's all over the place.
But he said he became a collector because he used to bet heavily at the...
at the Casino.
Oh, really?
No kidding.
That was very great.
I've never heard that connection before.
That's interesting.
But it makes sense.
And he said, I get my kicks at the auctions, even if he's, well, when he bought the Shakespeare's, he was sitting right next to Jim Cummins, so everybody knew who was buying Shakespeare.
Right, right.
I mean, there was no mystery about that.
Yeah, no mystery about it.
Yeah.
But, you know, it is a kick, I guess.
You had been selling off parts of yours.
I mean, in fact, I brought the Auden.
I asked you to sign it.
Well, this is part of the process of trying to winnow down and through a combination of selling and giving collections away.
And I decided to do the Auden because
I decided, well, he was marginal, not in terms of importance, but he really was English.
He became an American citizen.
So, I mean, you could have a collection of American literature without Auden.
That's the reason I picked that, and I had a fair amount invested in that.
It's a nice catalog, right?
Yeah, yeah, very nice.
He's, I think, as far as a modern person, just myself, he's wonderful.
Prices are high.
Prices are really high.
I've just been negotiating with him on one of the books in his new catalog.
The 20th anniversary one?
Yeah.
I haven't had a chance.
I just got it.
There's some great stuff in there.
It looks good.
We were just out there a couple weeks ago.
I did an interview with John Larroquette, the actor.
Oh, really?
Who was a wonderful example of your basic novice collector.
I mean, how do you get the novice collector into a book and make it interesting?
And he just kind of fell out of the sky to me.
He's a movie star.
A star with four Emmys and who's a recovering alcoholic on top of that.
Well, that's important.
That's part of the... I asked him why... I said, I understand your collection.
He showed me what he had.
I said, but I don't understand why you're collecting Charles Bukowski.
I said, I understand.
I don't... And then it came.
He said, because I saw in him what I was becoming.
Oh, really?
That's very good.
What a quote.
I mean, he said, I saw what was happening to my life and where I was going.
Oh, that's a wonderful quote.
Oh, my God, yeah.
That's very good stuff.
And then I interviewed a guy up in Sacramento.
I started an item on him in the New York Times.
He bought this Hemingway collection.
Again, his collection is good.
Certainly nothing to make a big deal about in a book.
My wife came with me.
I said, all right, we spent a half a day going to see this guy.
I said, why is he getting, tell me why he's getting into the book.
And she said, well, you asked him a question.
I was just a guess.
I said, did you mortgage your house to buy this collection?
And he said, yes.
And he said, my wife is divorcing me on top of it.
Right, exactly.
I like that.
That's part of that.
Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
This is what happens, isn't it?
Do we lose our senses?
Do we lose our grip?
Well, I tell you, I mean, you should probably talk to the families of collectors as well as the collectors.
I mean, I think that my son could give you an earful, and my wife to some extent.
My wife is basically very understanding, but, I mean, there were times, especially with the kids, where I would be so absorbed in catalogs and, you know, my list and putting books away and all the rest of it that it was, you know, that my list was more important than they were.
And I started building bookcases in my son's room, which became a huge fight.
Yeah, yeah.
I have two daughters.
And he was indignant, and my wife was indignant about that.
And I said, but they're nice books.
I noticed in one of those pieces where you tried to encourage your wife to collect.
I started out, that's how I, that was my rationale.
You see, that doesn't work.
No, of course not.
That's where the innate thing comes in.
She's not a collector.
Neither of my kids are collectors of anything.
Laura Kett was saying this, and his wife.
I said, what did your wife say?
Should I know Laura Kett?
I don't know.
Night Court.
Oh, I don't know.
The tall guy who plays.
I don't watch television, but I found out.
I see.
The tall guy who plays the sex star of the lawyer.
I don't watch television either.
I mean, I heard that he's very... I do watch television, but I don't know.
Really?
Yeah.
But, you know, anyway.
And he said, well, I started buying books for my wife, Ann Tyler.
So then when I went in to see the collection, I said, John, problem here.
I said, these books, they're in your collection.
I said, you didn't buy these for your wife.
I said, you bought these for yourself.
I mean, I really heartily endorsed the collecting of Ann Tyler.
She's wonderful.
Yeah, exactly.
And he smiled.
He said, well...
I want to take care of them, but I said, they have pride of place.
How are they arranged?
Yeah, well, they're right there.
They're all signed in their name.
Really?
I have a nice Antarctica collection, too.
Yeah, she's wonderful.
I agree with her.
You said we were talking, you have to talk to, so, I think your wife described you once as a...
She used a psychology term, Freudian.
She's a therapist, so it would be appropriate.
I don't remember that.
You describe yourself as an anal personality.
Right, yeah.
Is that something you want to keep on the record?
Sure, I don't care.
I think it fits.
Well, I mean, as you know, there are times when you feel that you are nuts.
I mean, this is just crazy.
This is insane.
Tell me how you enjoy the collection.
Now it's a box.
Are you having any anxiety about this?
Any anxiety attacks?
Well, yes, I do have anxiety attacks, and in fact, when we first moved the stuff into storage, there was a leak in the room, and I panicked.
There was very little damage, but it was very scary.
But it's in very good, you know, pretty safe conditions now and so forth.
And, well, I mean, I think it probably is the same for everybody.
I think the chase is part of the fun, too.
I mean, just looking for a book that you, you know, is hard to find is a lot of fun.
It's wonderful.
Yeah, a lot of fun.
It's thrilling.
Yeah, thrilling, exactly.
It is.
It's like winning at the crap table.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
With that done.
Exactly.
Occasionally.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
To find something that you'd have been... I got a call from Bob Fleck down at Okinaw.
I'd been looking for Lessing Rosenwald's Recollections of a Collector, which was only done in 250 copies.
And he published it, but it's very important to my study.
He called, he had it, and it was inscribed from Lessing to... I was overjoyed.
I couldn't wait for it to arrive.
Yeah, I know.
I know, that's very exciting.
And didn't go to bed the night, you know.
I stayed up and read the whole thing.
He was a wonderful collector.
I do think there's got to be another common denominator.
There's got to be a sort of a basic love for literature.
I mean, I think there are a lot of people who maybe stop reading and so forth, and God knows I haven't read anywhere near books that I've collected, but I think you have to probably have been a reader as a kid that
you know, the name Faulkner, Hemingway has to have the same excitement that Van Gogh or Renoir has for the Japanese.
I mean, I think there is, that there's glamour and excitement in just knowing you've got a book that had been handled by Faulkner or whatever.
Well, and that piece that you wrote, you describe Faulkner's inscribed... To his mother.
Oh, is that Billy?
Yeah.
That would absolutely knock me over.
You mentioned literature, but tell me the difference between the love of literature and the veneration for the object, the artifact.
There is still a leap that you have to make.
What makes this book such a coveted thing?
Why do you want it?
This goes back to your point about the Japanese who spent $120 million on two
two paintings.
And why didn't, what?
150 or whatever it is.
That, you know, he could have built the greatest.
Could have.
Well, he'd have the greatest, but a very respectable library.
A major, major, major.
A very respectable library.
It sounds, and I've read about this guy, that he's a real Philistine, you know, and that he wants down the most expensive Renoir and the most expensive Van Gogh in the world.
he's probably not smart enough to want to collect books, you know?
Because they're not considered glamorous and attractive by, you know, the world at large.
But there's something fundamental, and you mentioned it too, a picture, by the way, you put on the wall.
Yeah.
And you really do present it.
Right.
I mean, people see it.
Yeah.
People don't see your books.
This is really something... They are in my new apartment, I'll tell you.
Yeah, but they...
Only other people who are interested in books.
Yeah, yeah.
No, they never, exactly, exactly.
I was at Leonard Baskin's house.
Really?
Yeah, wonderful.
He and his wife.
How old is he?
Is he, really?
How old?
Yeah.
65, 66, 67.
Right around there.
He told me, and I have it for a while since.
It's underappreciative, I think.
He's great, but he's a wonderful collector.
I was there one afternoon.
It was four hours.
It was a Sunday.
And I was getting embarrassed.
I said, look, I'm loving this.
No, no, stay.
It's not often we get to share.
Right.
It's really true.
And I was with Shitey.
I mean, the same thing has happened time and time again.
When the collector gets, I mean, if your stuff was here, we'd be going.
I mean, I just know.
I mean, I feel very badly.
Exactly.
We'd be going through it, and the time would pass.
And I'd start to apologize, and he'd say, no, no, no.
You haven't seen this yet.
I haven't seen this yet.
And when Scheide went and got his Gutenberg Bible and put it on my lap.
Wow, Jesus.
And I went like this.
And he said, are you OK?
I said, I am a little lightheaded.
I said, this happened.
Oh, Roger.
I'm sorry, but we were saying something about Gordon Ray.
Yeah.
He was a wonderful man and an extraordinary collector as well.
wrote wonderfully about collecting as well.
I'm hopeful that... And there's a case where a lot of his books were at the Morgan and they went to the Morgan.
And that was probably known beforehand.
I'm going to have to Columbia this afternoon where they have some extraordinary...
oral history school.
Oh, yeah, that whole project, that whole Columbia oral history project, yeah.
I had to get permission to see it.
Really?
They didn't even realize I had to get permission.
No kidding.
Gerald Gottlieb, the fellow from the Morgan, did the interviews 20 years ago.
Really?
Yeah.
I got his... Yeah.
Gordon was really wonderful.
I'm going to get myself a cup.
Do you want something more?
No, I'm fine.
I've lost my wife for giving me this expert tape recorder.
I mean, you should talk to the families of collectors.
I mean, the madness aspect of it.
I mean, I think they can give you better stories than anybody about how far it goes.
The other thing, I mean, I know what drives me crazy when I
I have a book and a collection and my wife decides she wants to read it and I just have a fit.
And she says, this is ridiculous.
You can't have books and not read them and so forth.
How do you explain that?
Well, I think that probably gets down to the whole issue of the condition of an object.
It's an artifact.
Yeah, it's an artifact.
Exactly.
It is said that you know you are a collector.
The day you buy a book, you know you will never read.
Right.
Really?
Yeah, that's interesting.
Well, I mean, somebody says that, but it's not bad.
How do you know when you're a collector?
You've always been a collector.
Yeah.
That's important, isn't it?
I think it is.
Certainly in analyzing myself or analyzing how all this started and so forth, it seems to me that that
That instinct was always there, and I look at my own kids, and they really don't have it.
I thought my daughter had it for a while, because she started collecting Archie comic books.
But then I found I was going out and buying her Archie comic books.
What is it?
Do you understand this fascination for things?
I don't know.
I think probably all the Freudian analysis in this is probably very interesting, and I assume it's been written about.
You must have gotten into that.
Not in books.
Really?
I'm told there are some things that I won't get to.
I'm really interested in the stories.
There's a woman in Washington, Marsha Cotter.
She's Larry McMurtry's partner.
She wrote a paper, which I have a copy of, Why Women Don't Collect.
Well, I mean... That's interesting.
I mean, when you think about it, most of... And she admits it, and she says, I see them walk into my store, and they pick up a book, and they don't have the veneration for it.
Yeah, yeah.
And she said, I mean, even kids from high school.
Yeah.
And so she has some theories on that.
I mean, it was really... What were the, what are the theories?
Oh, there's some feminist theory that the woman...
having once been an object herself that, you know, she doesn't have to retain her speed or whatever.
Again, it comes down to who's to say.
But, I mean, there have been some very great women collectors.
Mary Hyde.
Arthur Freeman believes, in his view, she's the greatest living collector.
Of anything.
She's a very interesting story.
She's always been around book collectors, too.
Yeah, I mean, Donald started it, didn't he?
I think, yeah.
I'm going to see a guy in Chicago, Sam Rosenthal.
Have you ever heard of him?
No, but is he part of the, yeah.
Yeah, he's a lawyer, a very, very prominent lawyer.
He's about 90 or so.
Thanks, Tim.
But I understand he went out with Mary long before she met Donald.
Oh, no kidding.
Oh, my God.
She's an attractive woman.
I'm sure she was a real.
Yeah, but I mean, but there's another book collector, book collector.
This is the third.
Yeah.
Interesting.
Yeah, fascinating.
I'm seeing him in a couple of weeks.
If you want to tell me anything you think I should know while I look at my... Well, I assume... I think Michael Thomas would be good to talk to.
And Glenn Horowitz, you presumably know.
I've met... I run into Glenn all the time.
Yeah.
I go to all the auctions.
Yeah, yeah.
He's... I've had a lot of fun with him, and he's got some great stories, certainly.
He's a funny guy.
Yeah, yeah.
A very good dealer, I think, and it's been a big success.
He started out on the Strand, as a matter of fact.
Yeah.
But the three best dealers in my experience in this field have been Ralph and Glenn and Peter Howard, basically.
That's the three.
Yeah, that's the three.
At one point, I think early on, you were kind of suggesting that the collection might go to the New York Public Library, I guess in the beginning.
Well, as I say, I mean, or pieces of it.
I mean, the science fiction did go there.
I don't know.
I think it's going to come down to an economic issue, too.
I mean, I think it's become such a big part of my net worth that I can't, you know.
My children may not be able to eat.
Oh, yeah.
Do you have a figure that you care to share with me?
I'd rather not do that, yeah.
But it's too embarrassing.
Everybody rathers not.
Yeah, too embarrassing.
Except the chef.
Really?
Yeah, well, because he's giving it.
He's giving it.
He's putting values on it.
Right, right.
And he's giving it to institutions.
But you did say, I want everything to be broken up and sold, or you'll quote it as saying it's a little piece, I think.
Well, I don't think anything that categorical.
I mean, I think it's going to, it's, what I've done is large enough that I'm going to be able to do a variety of things with it.
But I guess what I'm kind of probing for here is this,
When Robert Ho's collection went out, he was quoted as a, where would I have gotten my books if it hadn't been for other collections?
Fair point.
I mean, should it all go to the museum and to the library where you can't get access to it?
Well, that's the problem, the access.
On the other hand, look at the Berg collection, and I mean, that's really been wonderful, and it's, I think, served people very well.
It's very well displayed.
I mean, they do great exhibitions.
That collection has been kept together, separately endowed.
I mean, I think that's quite wonderful.
Whereas the Lennox collection hasn't.
No, absolutely not.
Tom Adams last week said, you know, the J.C.
Brown collection, which is where we were, he said, was the first.
It was unique.
And he said, to this day, Brown University doesn't give a nickel to this collection.
Really?
Yeah.
They raise it, and it's here it is, part of Brown.
But one reason it is it retains its character, and it is distinctive, and its focus,
is because they made damn sure that it would.
They built the building.
They gave a half a million dollars, which was not inconsiderable in 1903.
That's a lot of money, right?
And they continue to raise the money.
Then you go over to the Hay Library, which is the Brown University special place.
And he said, but Lennox and Brown were contemporaries, and they were rivals for the same time.
And look what happened at about the same time.
You know, Lennox went here, and it's been absorbed into the main collection.
Nothing wrong with that.
Yeah, yeah.
But Brown's is still the Brown collection with his spirit.
That's kind of a long discourse.
But he had unique things.
Inevitably, I guess, another thing I'd like to discuss, at what point did you decide that books weren't enough?
I guess every serious collector at some point has to go after manuscripts, association copies, presentation copies.
They're really wonderful things.
Yeah, I think you get very quickly
come to the conclusion that that's what really makes it special, and that's what really makes it important, and that these things are available, and they're unique, and that they have real lasting... I mean, there may be 2,000 copies of a relatively rare first edition or first printing of a modern book, and they can become very scarce, and they can become valuable, but there's nothing really special about it.
Where it does become special is where there are, you know, something that has textual and substantive differences and reveal part of the creative process of the author, and the students will always find that fascinating.
And in the same sense, the connections between, you know, associations, whether it's, you know, Edith Wharton to her gardener or
You know, Hemingway to Fitzgerald, or Hemingway to Edmund Wilson, and so forth, which is my book that I've got.
Well, you do have some unique things, manuscript things.
Well, the Tennessee Williams archive.
Yeah, yeah.
I collect Tennessee Williams.
Really?
Yeah.
I think he's wonderful.
I think he's wonderful, too.
Very underrated.
And the prices for him are very... Very reasonable, yeah.
I collect Tennessee Williams.
I've got everything.
I mean, everything.
Right.
All of them, yeah.
I collect Arthur Miller, who I really enjoy.
I love Tennessee.
I think Williams has lived better than Miller, actually, in a way.
Yeah, but he's a better writer.
A better writer, exactly.
His stage directions are to be read aloud.
He was writing, you'd think, just for the director, but boy, you read these.
Did you read the Maria St.
Juste?
I interviewed her, matter of fact.
It's a wonderful book, I think.
She tells me I should interview Lachlan for the directions.
Oh, really?
Because, you know, they were supposed to get married.
She was supposed to marry him.
I noticed that.
I had no idea about that in the book.
Well, apparently, he started that press because, I mean, he had the money, number one, but he really wanted to publish the people he wanted to collect.
Right, right.
It's an interesting little twist on it.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
How did you decide?
I mean, did you just start collecting people you liked?
Is that how you did it?
Yeah, that's how I continued the course.
Yeah, right.
I think you have to do that.
I think that I like themes.
I love
I've got a really outstanding collection of literary biographies.
I love this.
I mean, for my work, but I go after them.
I love reading about writers.
And you do go for, when you pick a writer, you go for completeness, not just the high spots.
Yeah, but I've kind of refined it down to first trades.
I mean, these little, I hate them.
I detest them.
Literary prostitution.
I've written piece stories about them.
It's manufactured rarity.
It's taking something and deciding that we're only going to do 150 copies of this.
You know, the marketplace is such that let's do a first printing, and if it's good, then we'll go into the second printing.
Now, if you're perspicacious enough to buy this author, it's the marketplace.
I'm really interested in the marketplaces, not the perception of the writer.
I love having a couple of John Cheever things, first editions, with remainder stamps on them.
Right, right, absolutely.
That tells you something.
That doesn't bother me when they say it's got a remainder stamp on it, really.
No, it doesn't bother me either.
That means that the Wap Shop didn't sell out its first edition.
It's like finding a Rembrandt in a junk shop, exactly.
That's right.
The other thing I think it really came to do with it is the whole proof thing.
That's the mistake I made in the beginning, was collecting a lot of proofs.
You're the first person to talk to me about it, which is worth my having.
Really?
I think, you know, in a way, it's kind of an artificial rarity, too.
I mean, if there are textual differences, it has some independent value.
But just as, I mean, the first appearance of the book, and then which, I mean, it's the galleys, it's the corrected galleys, I mean, those are fascinating documents.
Okay.
I got this thing to be really complete.
You wanted to have the proof and then the, you know, the copy of Rabbit Run and so forth, and they sell for big prices.
Well, I'll shut this off if you're interested in it.
Well, Robert Stone's last book, I've forgotten the title of it, but I was reading it in proof.
It was the Hollywood one about the actress.
Yeah, and he put the liver on the wrong side of the body.
Oh, really?
And I called Knopf, and I told him, and they wrote me a letter, and Bob wrote me a letter, and they fixed it.
It's a small thing, but he said, do you have any idea how many doctors I hear from?
Yeah, exactly.
I've always wondered about it.
I mean, have you read the book in proof?
Yeah.
To review it?
And I called, feeling that they might have some time to fix it, but I kept the correspondence, and
So personally, for me, it's a... Yeah.
But it's such a... So what do you do with the proofs you don't want to keep?
I give them away.
Give them away?
Yeah.
Because I know Glenn Horowitz had a thriving business with the Times reviewers.
I mean, they would... Well, that's what I'm supposed to do with it, you know?
Right.
I don't know why not.
But really, the only ones that are worth anything are fiction.
Yeah, yeah.
Proofs, I mean... Proof, yeah, exactly.
They're really junk for the most part.
Right.
And I've really found that... I would never go out and buy one.
personal.
I just don't, I agree with you.
But a dealer will really try and convince you that you have to.
I had a big, big, long discussion with Ralph, I mean, not, I guess about a year ago, because he bought all these Steinbeck proofs for huge prices.
And he was asking huge prices, you know, $8,000, $10,000, $12,000 for proofs that just happened.
I mean, there was no real substantive difference and so forth.
And he, I think he obviously thought I would be
one of the prime customers for those, and I didn't order anything, and he called me up and he said, you're not interested in these proofs?
And I said, I'm really not.
This is just crazy.
And I don't know whether he unloaded them or not, but I just don't get it.
If you gave me a choice between something signed by an author... I agree.
...or a proof... I totally agree with you.
...a signed book any day of the year.
And I don't care who it's inscribed to, either.
More people think that they'd rather have just one signed than inscribed.
I'd rather have one inscribed.
There's more to it.
There's like a little letter.
There's something there.
There's a history to it.
However, the proof of Sam and the Fury would probably be $25,000, $30,000, I would think, or Sun Also Rises or whatever.
Have you ever felt that... I mean, I've talked to some people.
This guy Zinman.
You ever have Michael Zinman?
Yeah, I've heard the name, yeah.
Crazy.
I mean, wild.
Wild, yeah.
But...
But he does.
He's got a business.
He's got three houses filled.
His imprint collection is extraordinary.
But he said up until two years ago, they didn't go by where he wasn't in debt to some dealer or another.
I don't know.
I mean, you certainly have a different... Oh, I've carried big balances with all the... Despite your lineage as well.
Yeah, exactly.
Oh, absolutely.
And in fact, you know,
Not a fair amount of trading and, you know, in kind and so forth.
I think I'm out of debt at the moment, unless I buy this book from Ralph, and I'll be back in debt again.
But at the moment, I'm out of debt.
I'm told that there was a Vanderbilt, by the way, who was quite a collector down in South Carolina, who built a $200 million.
Oh, the North Carolina jewelry.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, is that... I've seen the house.
I don't know.
I don't know whether both of the... Somebody just mentioned that to me.
Yeah.
What's really disappointing about the Vanderbilts is they built all these huge houses and
But they bought terrible art, and they bought books by the yard.
I mean, they bought, you know, that generation did.
Well, Henry Huntington did beautifully with books, but his art tasted terrible.
But I mean, Vanderbilt nowhere approached what he did or what the Widener did or what any of them.
And it would have been, they probably spent as much money, you know, buying these sets and stuff.
Huntington is fascinating.
I've gone through all of his correspondence at the Rosenbach.
I love those books.
Did you talk to John Fleming before he died?
Missed him.
No, I've missed a few.
Zeitlin, by the way, left quite a nice oral history on L.A., so I'm getting that.
Oh, great.
And Howell left one.
I'm getting Howell's oral history.
And going up, Lou Feldman left an oral history.
Did he really?
Yeah.
That was before my time, but I gather he was quite a... Well, I have a chapter at the University of Texas
Really?
Yeah.
Fascinating.
Yeah, that would be fascinating.
Institutional bibliomania.
Yeah.
Without question.
I had a blank check, Texas style.
I spent five days down there.
And look what they got.
I've never seen it.
I would love to get it.
Good for you.
Yeah.
So many people wrap them, but they bought a lot of shit, some people say.
And then, you know Nicholas Parker?
I'm dropping names.
Yeah.
But I asked people.
You know what he said?
He said, you know, we're just discovering some 16th century writers now
We're just discovering now that they're good.
Absolutely.
And I think this is a pertinent point for you to make, because you have 6,000 copies.
A lot of people might say, hey, a lot of these people are worthless.
And you might say, well, they're worthless now, in your view.
But nobody looked at Melville until they discovered Billy Budd in the 1920s.
And Texas is buying some stuff that may, in the view of some critics, be worthless.
But who's to judge?
Well, that's such a subjective judgment, anyway.
Subjective, but I think that what they've done is pretty spectacular.
They have mainly focused on 20th century manuscripts.
They went after stuff that nobody else was going, that was available.
They got all that, I mean, fabulous archives, right, exactly.
And they take care of it beautifully.
I don't know if you've been down there.
I've never been down there.
I want to see it.
Gorgeous.
Well, it's not gorgeous.
It's like a fortress.
The Beinecke is beautiful.
Yeah.
back in the contrast, the two buildings.
His attitude is there.
You walk into Texas, and it's like they've got Uzis.
I mean, they don't, but it's a bank of streets and cars, and there were no windows.
And of course, the Beinecke is like a fountain of books, and it's very inviting.
But this is the Ivy League, and this is Texas.
I always thought, I mean, often,
I thought about that a lot when I had all my books were out and they will be out again.
And I said, you know, if somebody could just walk in here and if they knew what they were doing, I mean, walk away with three or four things worth a lot of money that it would take me months to notice were gone.
And the only protection you have against that is that people don't know and don't care.
You know how many people have said that to me?
This guy Zindan, for instance, has a house.
that his wife doesn't know about.
Jesus.
I got it.
Bradley Martin was very sort of paranoid about his books, wasn't he?
Yeah, well, paranoid.
Yeah, he should have.
Well, exactly.
We're talking about a whole other category.
Right, exactly, yeah.
But I said, Michael, you don't even lock the house.
He said,
people come in here aren't going to be interested in this grungy old book.
I said, they might pull them off the shelves looking for the money.
But they're not interested in an Eliot Bible book.
And there is some merit to that.
As I'm building my library now, and I'm thinking, this is going to be visible from the street.
But who cares about books?
Very few people.
I at least had most of my value ones upstairs where people didn't always go.
But in this new apartment, they're all going to be in the living room.
You know, when you have a party or something.
Tell me, what time is your next day?
Oh, I'm good till 1.
I'm just going to change this tape to the other side before it runs out.